C. Wright Mills unfinished notes. Posted online. Kelsey disappointed that we didn't know the song "Tears for Fears".
What is sociology? The sociological imagination. Need to use empirical evidence to inform our understanding. 
Video main ideas: Sociology allows us to see strange in familiar. We go through life taking things for granted. 
	Sociology tries to make you more woke. Not taking things for granted. 
	Seeing the general in the familiar. 
	Kelsey comments on weird looks we give her. 
Assigned reading: Intro to sociology text, first chapter. 
Pre WW2, less of the American population went to college. 5% of Americans had a college education. 20% by 1960s. Colleges were only looking for particular parts of people, who would be leaders of society. Like tall people with not big ears. Athletes did not get that much preference, not as much as people think. 
James Comey Ex Director of FBI 6'8".
How are things that seem to be natural, socially constructed?
	University admissions are a social construct. 
		Human beings established these practices. 
		They get maintained, and become the norm.
		Baby boys more commonly referred to as sturdy. 
		Baby girls more commonly referred to as delicate, pretty. 
		Kelsey's older sister's hair grew slower, put a ribbon on to ensure she was seen as a girl.
		Interactions define our social constructs, they are real. 
		The gender gap. Men outearn women across the board.  
	Gender, appropriate behavior for masculine and feminine, all social constructs. 
How is social order possible?
	How does social order arise? If someone took control of the classroom, what should Kelsey do?
		Ask them who they are. 
		Call the police immediately. Why does she have the right to do that?
		Where does Kelsey's power come from in this context?
		You are paying for an education, you expect it...
Does the individual matter?
	Individual action, agency. 
	We live in a socially constructed world, and people have categories to be placed in, not necessarily by choice. Part of our identity. 
	Born into a system of constraint. 
	Kelsey born to a middle class white family in rural Wisconscin. Is that agency or structure?
		Need determination, get out of rural.
		Parents paid for graduate education. 
		Equally talented people did not get to persue dreams because family did not support.
		Economy was better, possible to work through school. Something impossible nowadays. 
		Kelsey had a job in high school not as necessity but as a moral action. 
	Sociology is good at predicting what is going to happen with groups, not individuals. Using data. 
		How are the times we live in different from other times? C. Wright Mills
		What kind of impact do these changes have. 
The origin of sociology as a discipline.
	Late to the table, compared to economics. 
	Division of labor. Anthropologists vs Sociologists. No longer the same.
	Socioligists study industrial societies, anthropologists study pre industrial societies. 
	Need to understand the industrial revolution in order to understand sociology. 
		New sources of jobs, people move into cities for work.
		Number of people in agriculture goes down.
		1940 40% of Americans were farmers. Worked in agriculture. Today, 2% of Americans are farmers. 
		Development of science technology. Internal combustion engine.
		Distribution of wealth disrupted. 
		Old family structures no longer sustainable, new structures not yet established. 
	Enclosure acts in Great Britain. 
		Before industrial revolution, farmed to survive. 
		Most people did not own the land that they farmed. 
		After WW1, this was no longer a thing. 
		Tenants being kicked off land in order to make space of sheep. For wool. 
		Far more profitable to make wool for textiles. 
		Before textile factories, people had to make fabric manually, time intensive. 
		The luddite rebellion destroyed the machines because the machines destroyed their way of life. 
		Growth of extremely poor working class that could not survive unless entire family worked. 
		Marie Antoinette: Let them eat cake. Social upheavals ensued. 
	New Social theories emerged
		Pre industrial revolution, a social problem was treated as ethics. Adam Smith trained as an ethicist, was an economists. 
	Auguste Comte (1798-1957)
		Coined term: sociology
		We can take the same scientific approach, and use those principles to study society. 
		With these facts, we can actually diagnose social problems with scientific expertise. 
		Sociology would be the queen of the sciences, and sociologists would become the king. He was wrong of course.
		He thought his information was the ultimate TRUTH. Because we used rigorous scientific methods. 
	Karl Marx
	Friedrich Engels
	Marxist Theory
		Looks at industrial revolution mid to late 19th century. 
		Communism and socialism. They mainly studied capitalism. 
		They think that society can be understood completely by economic result and influences. 
		Concentration of wealth in bourgeosie. Concentration of power in the workers. Imbalance.
	Max Weber (1864-1920)
		German theorist.
		Social values is the source of change. 
		His treatise on modern capitalism said that early protestents were accidentally successful.
		Protestents must live a pure simple life. Be honest businesspeople. 
		What do you do with your money?
		How to store the wealth? 
		Reinvest your money. Shun material wealth allows you to invest and accumulate wealth. 
		This asceticism dwindles and we have modern capitalism. 
		Bureaucracy. The response to controlling large organizations. They are necessary. 
		We need bureacracy to organize decisions. 
		Before bureaucracy you had a monopoly and you couldn't get anything done. 
	Emile Durkheim (1958-1917)
		Not a socialist. But his best friend was a socialist. 
		Significant because he contributed to establishment of sociology as a discipline in universities. 
		He was interested by his countrymen. He was French. 
	Harriet Martineau (1802-1876)
		Wrote lots of books, first female.
		You men study men in power! Need to look at women, children, family. 
	W.E.B. DuBois(1868-1965)
		First African American to get a PhD from Harvard
		Double consciousness, founded NAACP	
Sociological Significance of the book Suicide by Emile Durkheim
	We are at a height of suicide rate in a hundred years. 
	Higher rates in industrialized nations.
	High in former communist countries, Soviet countries.
	Durkheim chose not to become a rabbi, as his father was. 
	He was in dialogue with socialists of the time. 
	Concerned with inequality that came from industrialization. 
	Suicide is a classical sociological text.
	Durkheim said that suicide is not a personal or private trouble. There are social implications of this act.
	What are the social facts that contribute to suicide?
	Evidence that Protestants have higher suicide rates than Catholics. 
	Egoistic suicide, cause by insufficient social integration. 
	Widowers and intellectuals has higher rates of suicide.
	Protestants have a tradition of free inquiry, leaves them alone with their faith. 
	Catholics has a agreed upon ideology, you can ask questions to religious authorities. 
	Religious freedom as a divisive force. Protestants divide people. 
	Catholics have a very strong community, solidarity. 
	Catholics are simply more socially integrated than protestants. 
	Ties to others are weakened when you are a protestant. Catholics are closer together. Self absorbtion leads to suicide. 
	  
How do you know when a fact is a fact?
	You can repeat it, other people can repeat it. 
	
IClicker Questions: 
D, college admissions processes has undergone serious revision across time. 
A, True, it is harder for white people to get into UCB because of affirmative action 
	Actually false, UCB hasn't had affirmative action since 1998. 
	If you were part of an underrepresented group, you still had to meet the requirements. 
	Still, much more affirmative action got refused than got accepted. 
	1995, 4600 underrepresented students out of 22000 students in UC System. UC system refused about 150,000 applicants. 
		Admissions chances of 150,000 denied applicants wouldn't get increased that much? What?
		Kelsey's main point: Your chances are not great at getting admitted into the UC system. 1 in 8. 
A, Investigate the gene pool within different countries to find genetic markers of mental illness. Sociologists would NOT go for this approach. 

8/31/17 Lecture
Disrupt the idea of not questioning education. Public service. Mentorship with faculty. Victoria Robinson. American Cultures and Anti-Apartheid movement connected to American Cultures. Ethnic studies marginalized...students wanted to make sure that curriculum was desegregated. Create a requirement that could be offered anywhere on campus. Learning about multiple experiences. 
Sociological Significance of the book Suicide
	Egoistic suicide, cause by insufficient social integration, Durkheim said. Catholics vs Protestants.
	2012, two European epidemiologists looked at suicide rates in 1800's. Limited study of Prussia. Protestants has higher suicide rates than Catholics.
	What should we think about this conclusion? Sample size? How suicide is defined? Suicide is a sin in Catholic faith, so coroners may be biased.
	What did Catholics have that Protestants lacked? More integration. Depression is negatively correlated with sense of affiliation. 
	Psychologists say that if you feel a strong connection with 9 or more groups of people in contemporary society, those people almost never get depressed. 
	Poor people have denser social ties, protective of depression. 
	Durkheim was onto something! Our connections with one another prevent depression. 
	Our social position influences...
Second form of suicide: Anomic Suicide. Normlessness, don't know how to act. 
	Insufficient moral regulation causes this type of suicide. 
	Happens in times of rapid change. 
	Wealthy people are more likely to commit this type of suicide. 
	Wealthy people are not bounded by the money regulations of normal society. 
	Late industrial societies, material accumulation undermines our morality in terms of social interactions. 
	Morality is externally imposed, collective conscience. Right vs wrong, good vs bad. 
	We actually get our morality from institutions outside of us. 
	In this day and age, only social institutions can impose morality within us. 
	Religion, parents, schools. Mainly, our psychology creates our perception of needs.
	No limit of physical wants. There is never enough. Cravings become a source of torment. 
	Only a morally regulative force can limit our desire for more. 
UC Berkeley: Key location for Happiness studies
	Even though USA is very rich, we are unhappy.
	GDP goes up, happiness doesn't go up.
	Growing economic inequality.
	Stressing over what you don't have is harmful to health. 
	The greater degree of economic inequality, the worse for the country. 
	But the people at the top are not happy either. Why?
	Hypothesis: People at higher economic status, feel less compassion. 
	Compassion is needed for happiness. 
	Kids of higher and lower economic statis experienced the worlds in different ways. 
	Humans in the the face of threat, connect to people. 
	Without threats, kids don't connect to people as much. 
	Those lower down in the economy could see expressions better. 
	Lower social class cannot control outcomes, but their friends they can always count on. 
	Happiness is a skill, as opposed to a personality trait. 
	If you're too compassionate, you wont be cut throat enough to make it to the top. 
	Video: Can money buy happiness. 
What would Durkheim say about this video?
	The pattern of ...
Division of Labour in Society, Emile Durkheim
	Why do sociologists still look at suicide? It shows the power of external social forces in the most individual of actions. 
	Explores transition from agricultural to industrial society. Sociology rooted in industrialization. 
	People lived in very poor conditions. 
	Less than 5% of kids survived to the age of 18. 
	Why are social solidarity and moral integrity significant. 
	What is the "division of labour"
		Who does what, the ways in which people divide up work in the economy
		Who becomes what profession. 
		Agriculture has few divisions of labor, not so in an industrial society. 
		With this mechanical solidarity, nobody had freedom to explore possibilities, develop distinct talents. 
	Get a field that aligns with your talents. Specialization -> interdependence
	Bring different skills to the common field. Need everyone's skills in order to survive. 
	Industrial society can give us best of multiple worlds, individual talents, social cohesion -> organic solidarity. 
		Need to depend on other people's skills as a practical tool. 
		Each can attain his/her end without preventing others from getting theirs. 
	If industrial capitalist societies holds this promise of social solidarity, what do we need to discover these natural talents. 
	Schools, teaching colleges, need to remove artificial sources of priviledge and disadvantage. 
	Educational segregation, illegal for b/w kids to go to school together. 
	Qualities of education differed. 
	Prejudices interfere with fair competition. Poorer kids cannot be discovered. 
	Must get rid of inherited wealth. 
		Could inherit job of parents.
		Nepotism. May or may not be talented, get unfair advantage. 
		Instead create a meritocratic society. 
		The school is the level playing field. 
	The inequality in Durkheim's world comes from distribution of talents. 
	Do we have all this need?
	Durkheim does not consider the supply of jobs. What if we have more talented people than jobs. 
	Have an excellent public education. 
	Foundation of legitiate scial inequality, good public schools. 
	Restitutive law is emphasize in societies with organic solidarity. 
	Society has obligation to individuals, individuals has obligation to society.
What exactly is social justice?
	
IClicker questions
What is the cause of egoistic suicide. A. Self absorbtion. 
For anomic suicide, what is the cause? B. Moral emptiness. 

Lecture 9/5/19
Video. Drivers of luxury cars are more likely to run pedestrian crosswalks. 3 to 4 times more likely to break the law. 90% of people stop. 
	There is a link between wealth and unseemly behavior. 
	Study of social class led to public outcry against the bahavior. 
	Study gets called out for being too liberal because of Berkeley. 
	What is it about wealth that makes people ...?
	Played a rigged version of monopoly. Advantageous people felt like they deserved to win. Entitled. Become less attuned to what got you to where you are. 
	Economic inequality higher than they ever were. 
	Wealth mindset, generosity is for suckers. 
	Statistically speaking, you tend to want to stay at the top. 
	If you make a wealthy person feel less wealthy, they become more generous somehow. 
What is the point of this video? What would Durkheim say about this video?
	What is the point of this research?
	Would Durkheim agree?
	Durkheim would look at the morality...release you from the constraints. 
	Extreme difference in wealth disconnects wealthy people from society. 
	Eating the pretzels is interesting, because wealthy people look more to other things for comfort. 
Is this an inditement of wealthy people? 
	Paul Salmon's was not affected by cancer girl the first time, but second time around he was moved more. 
	Chewing with the full mouth could be interpreted both ways.
	The syntax of the people was affected.
	Wealth inequality tears social cohesion. Modern industrialist society must make changes in order to become socially cohesive. 
	Industrial societies will develop will develop a more sophisticated kind of solidarity. 
	Individuals can distinguish themselves through their own specializations. 
		There will be a sense of interdependence.
What allows 300 people to get together at this time?
	Need to sign up for the class.
	Get into Berkeley.
	Need a Berkeley to get into...etc. etc.
Interdependence becomes a practical tool for survival. 
	There are some challenges to be faced. 
	There are artificial sources of inequality and priviledge.
	Durkheim believed that women had smaller brains than men, due to smaller body size. 
	Is Durkheim a socialist?
	Durkheim did not believe that businesses should be state owned. 
	When we all discover our talents, some talents will be worth more to society than others. We should have differences between individual talents. 
Foundation of legitimate social inequality, good public schools! 
Wednesday, Thursday quiz next week.
	Should there be a resentment between two differing grades?
	Was it not based off merit?
Good schools are the foundation for developing our talents.
	Our legal system will change and we will focus less on punishment and more on rehabilitation. 
	Through this, we will achieve organic solidarity. 
	But we must agree on certain rules. 
	There must be agreed upon rules and norms, where we can conduct our lives safely and profitably. 
	The respect must be there or else there wont be enough glue. 
	We learn our moral behavior through a strong society. 
Moral integrity has its roots in society. 
	Durkheim wouldn't want homeless shelters because there shouldn't be homeless people. 
	Durkheim sees people who are upset with capitalism. 
	In 1890s with workers demonstrations. 
		No need to tear down the bourgeosie. 
		Need interesting, remunitive jobs.
		Jobs that match the natural abilities of people. 
	In an American society, we tolerate social inequality
		ONLY if, we are convinced of social mobility. 
		The ability to move from one class to another based on merit. 
		No matter how hard you work, you can't get anywhere, bad social mobility. 
	Need social justice within a society, according to Durkheim. 